---
layout: post
title:  Activity-dependent FUS dysregulation disrupts synaptic homeostasis
date:   2014-10-16
image:  post-4.jpg
author: Ashwinikumar Kulkarni
tags:   PNAS
---
<!-- ![post-thumb]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/images/blog/post-1.jpg){:class="img-fluid rounded float-left mr-5 mb-4"} -->

The RNA-binding protein fused-in-sarcoma (FUS) has been associated with
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration
(FTLD), two neurodegenerative disorders that share similar clinical and
pathological features. Both missense mutations and overexpression of wild-type
FUS protein can be pathogenic in human patients. To study the molecular and
cellular basis by which FUS mutations and overexpression cause disease, we
generated novel transgenic mice globally expressing low levels of human
wild-type protein (FUS(WT)) and a pathological mutation (FUS(R521G)). FUS(WT)
and FUS(R521G) mice that develop severe motor deficits also show
neuroinflammation, denervated neuromuscular junctions, and premature death,
phenocopying the human diseases. A portion of FUS(R521G) mice escape early
lethality; these escapers have modest motor impairments and altered sociability,
which correspond with a reduction of dendritic arbors and mature spines.
Remarkably, only FUS(R521G) mice show dendritic defects; FUS(WT) mice do not.
Activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors 1/5 in neocortical slices and
isolated synaptoneurosomes increases endogenous mouse FUS and FUS(WT) protein
levels but decreases the FUS(R521G) protein, providing a potential biochemical
basis for the dendritic spine differences between FUS(WT) and FUS(R521G) mice.

*Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Nov 4;111(44):E4769-78. Epub 2014 Oct 16. <a target="_blank" href="https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1406162111">doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1406162111</a>*

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1406162111
PMCID: PMC4226112
PMID: 25324524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
