---
layout: post
title:  Foxp1 in Forebrain Pyramidal Neurons Controls Gene Expression Required for Spatial Learning and Synaptic Plasticity
date:   2017-11-08
image:
author: Ashwinikumar Kulkarni
tags:   [2017, JournalofNeuroscience]
---
<!-- ![post-thumb]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/images/blog/post-1.jpg){:class="img-fluid rounded float-left mr-5 mb-4"} -->

Genetic perturbations of the transcription factor Forkhead Box P1 (FOXP1) are
causative for severe forms of autism spectrum disorder that are often comorbid
with intellectual disability. Recent work has begun to reveal an important role
for FoxP1 in brain development, but the brain-region-specific contributions of
Foxp1 to autism and intellectual disability phenotypes have yet to be determined
fully. Here, we describe Foxp1 conditional knock-out (Foxp1cKO) male and female
mice with loss of Foxp1 in the pyramidal neurons of the neocortex and the
CA1/CA2 subfields of the hippocampus. Foxp1cKO mice exhibit behavioral
phenotypes that are of potential relevance to autism spectrum disorder,
including hyperactivity, increased anxiety, communication impairments, and
decreased sociability. In addition, Foxp1cKO mice have gross deficits in
learning and memory tasks of relevance to intellectual disability. Using a
genome-wide approach, we identified differentially expressed genes in the
hippocampus of Foxp1cKO mice associated with synaptic function and development.
Furthermore, using magnetic resonance imaging, we uncovered a significant
reduction in the volumes of both the entire hippocampus as well as individual
hippocampal subfields of Foxp1cKO mice. Finally, we observed reduced maintenance
of LTP in area CA1 of the hippocampus in these mutant mice. Together, these data
suggest that proper expression of Foxp1 in the pyramidal neurons of the
forebrain is important for regulating gene expression pathways that contribute
to specific behaviors reminiscent of those seen in autism and intellectual
disability. In particular, Foxp1 regulation of gene expression appears to be
crucial for normal hippocampal development, CA1 plasticity, and spatial
learning.

SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Loss-of-function mutations in the transcription
factor Forkhead Box P1 (FOXP1) lead to autism spectrum disorder and intellectual
disability. Understanding the potential brain-region-specific contributions of
FOXP1 to disease-relevant phenotypes could be a critical first step in the
management of patients with these mutations. Here, we report that Foxp1
conditional knock-out (Foxp1cKO) mice with loss of Foxp1 in the neocortex and
hippocampus display autism and intellectual-disability-relevant behaviors. We
also show that these phenotypes correlate with changes in both the genomic and
physiological profiles of the hippocampus in Foxp1cKO mice. Our work
demonstrates that brain-region-specific FOXP1 expression may relate to distinct,
clinically relevant phenotypes.

*J Neurosci. 2017 Nov 8;37(45):10917-10931. Epub 2017 Oct 4. <a target="_blank" href="https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1005-17.2017">doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1005-17.2017</a>*
